src/content/blog/SHA1-hash.md, before:

---
title: " Understanding the SHA-1 Algorithm"
description: "Secure Hash Algorithm 1 was for years one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions. "
difficulty: "beginner"
pubDate: 2025-07-18
author: "Pashalis Laoutaris"
category: "Hash Functions"
visualizer: "SHA1Visualizer"
---
SHA-1 (Secure Hash Algorithm 1) was for years one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions for securing digital information. Like MD5, its reputation for security has been eroded by advances in cryptanalysis. This article explores SHA-1's history, technical workings, pros and cons, reasons for its obsolescence, recent news, and provides reliable references.

## Table of Contents

1. [History of SHA-1](#history-of-sha-1)
2. [How SHA-1 Works: A Detailed Guide](#how-sha-1-works-a-detailed-guide)
3. [Pros and Cons of SHA-1](#pros-and-cons-of-sha-1)
4. [Why SHA-1 is Broken](#why-sha-1-is-broken)
5. [Latest News about SHA-1](#latest-news-about-sha-1)
6. [References](#references)

## History of SHA-1

SHA-1 was developed by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 1995 as a federal standard. It was designed to be a secure successor to SHA-0, which had an undisclosed flaw.

SHA-1 quickly gained enormous popularity and became the default hash function used in SSL/TLS certificates, software updates, digital signatures, and version control systems like Git. However, cryptanalysts began to expose vulnerabilities, and by the 2010s, SHA-1 was being phased out in favor of stronger hash functions.

## How SHA-1 Works: A Detailed Guide

SHA-1 processes data to produce a **160-bit (20-byte)** hash value, usually rendered as a 40-character hexadecimal string.

### 1. **Padding**

- The message is padded so its length (in bits) is congruent to 448 mod 512 (i.e., length = 512n + 448).
- Padding starts with a single `1` bit, then enough `0`s are added to reach the required length.

### 2. **Appending Length**

- The original length of the message (in bits) is appended as a 64-bit big-endian integer.

### 3. **Initialization**

- Five 32-bit variables are initialized with specific constants:
  - h0 = 0x67452301
  - h1 = 0xEFCDAB89
  - h2 = 0x98BADCFE
  - h3 = 0x10325476
  - h4 = 0xC3D2E1F0

### 4. **Processing Message in 512-bit Blocks**

- Each block is divided into 16 words (32 bits each), then expanded into 80 words using bitwise operations.
- For each of 80 rounds per block, a series of logical functions (including AND, OR, XOR, NOT) and modular additions are applied.
- The five state variables are updated in each round.

### 5. **Output**

- After all blocks are processed, the hash value is the concatenation of h0, h1, h2, h3, and h4 (totaling 160 bits).
- Final output is typically shown as a 40-character hexadecimal value.

#### Example in Pseudocode

```plaintext
for each 512-bit block:
    expand block into 80 32-bit words
    initialize variables a, b, c, d, e with h0-h4
    for i = 0 to 79:
        perform round-specific operations and logical functions
    update h0-h4
output: h0 || h1 || h2 || h3 || h4
````

## Pros and Cons of SHA-1

|**Pros**|**Cons**|
|---|---|
|More secure than MD5 (historically)|Vulnerable to collision attacks|
|Widespread historical adoption|No longer considered secure for cryptography|
|Simple and efficient implementation|Susceptible to chosen-prefix collisions|
|Good performance on most platforms|Phased out by major organizations and browsers|

## Why SHA-1 is Broken

SHA-1 was designed to be collision-resistant, but cryptanalysis has shown this is no longer the case. In February 2017, Google and CWI Amsterdam publicly demonstrated the first practical SHA-1 collision, known as the **SHAttered** attack. This achievement proved that attackers can create two different documents with the same SHA-1 hash, undermining trust in digital signatures, certificates, and file integrity mechanisms.

### Key Weaknesses

- **Collision Attacks:** It is now feasible (using cloud computing) for attackers to generate two different inputs with the same SHA-1 hash.
- **Cost of Attack Drops:** As of 2024, the cost to generate a SHA-1 collision is under $50,000, well within the reach of motivated attackers.
- **Chosen-prefix Collisions:** In 2019, researchers demonstrated more dangerous "chosen-prefix" collisions, allowing attackers to create two _arbitrary_ files with matching SHA-1 hashes.
- **Deprecation:** Browsers, certificate authorities, and security standards organizations have deprecated SHA-1 for all security-critical purposes.

**Summary:** SHA-1 should not be used for cryptographic security. SHA-2 and SHA-3 are the current recommended standards.

## Latest News about SHA-1

- **2024:** Almost all major browsers, TLS libraries, and certificate authorities have completely disabled support for SHA-1 certificates.
- **Git and Code Repositories:** Git, which originally relied on SHA-1, has implemented SHA-256 support and recommends migrating repositories.
- **Cryptanalysis:** Researchers continue to improve collision-finding techniques; in 2023, new records for SHA-1 collision computation were set.
- **Industry Guidance:** NIST, Microsoft, Google, and Mozilla have all issued strong warnings or outright bans on the use of SHA-1 in any security context.

**Bottom Line:** SHA-1 is obsolete and insecure for any use beyond non-critical checksums.

## References

- [NIST Secure Hash Standard (SHA-1)](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/180/1/final)
- [SHAttered: First Practical Collision for SHA-1 (Google & CWI)](https://shattered.io/)
- [SHA-1 is a Shambles (chosen-prefix collision attack)](https://sha-mbles.github.io/)
- [RFC 6194: Deprecation of SHA-1 and MD5](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6194)
- [Wikipedia: SHA-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1)
- [NIST Policy on Hash Functions](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-131a/rev-2/final)

> **Note:** For new applications, use SHA-2 (e.g., SHA-256, SHA-512) or SHA-3.

Commit message:

upd: images at blog pages

src/content/blog/SHA1-hash.md, after:

---
title: " Understanding the SHA-1 Algorithm"
description: "Secure Hash Algorithm 1 was for years one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions. "
difficulty: "beginner"
pubDate: 2025-07-18
author: "Pashalis Laoutaris"
category: "Hash Functions"
thumbnail: "./images/sha1-hash.jpg"
thumbnailAlt: "A visual representation of the SHA-1 hashing algorithm."
visualizer: "SHA1Visualizer"
---
SHA-1 (Secure Hash Algorithm 1) was for years one of the most widely used cryptographic hash functions for securing digital information. Like MD5, its reputation for security has been eroded by advances in cryptanalysis. This article explores SHA-1's history, technical workings, pros and cons, reasons for its obsolescence, recent news, and provides reliable references.

## Table of Contents

1. [History of SHA-1](#history-of-sha-1)
2. [How SHA-1 Works: A Detailed Guide](#how-sha-1-works-a-detailed-guide)
3. [Pros and Cons of SHA-1](#pros-and-cons-of-sha-1)
4. [Why SHA-1 is Broken](#why-sha-1-is-broken)
5. [Latest News about SHA-1](#latest-news-about-sha-1)
6. [References](#references)

## History of SHA-1

SHA-1 was developed by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 1995 as a federal standard. It was designed to be a secure successor to SHA-0, which had an undisclosed flaw.

SHA-1 quickly gained enormous popularity and became the default hash function used in SSL/TLS certificates, software updates, digital signatures, and version control systems like Git. However, cryptanalysts began to expose vulnerabilities, and by the 2010s, SHA-1 was being phased out in favor of stronger hash functions.

## How SHA-1 Works: A Detailed Guide

SHA-1 processes data to produce a **160-bit (20-byte)** hash value, usually rendered as a 40-character hexadecimal string.

### 1. **Padding**

- The message is padded so its length (in bits) is congruent to 448 mod 512 (i.e., length = 512n + 448).
- Padding starts with a single `1` bit, then enough `0`s are added to reach the required length.

### 2. **Appending Length**

- The original length of the message (in bits) is appended as a 64-bit big-endian integer.

### 3. **Initialization**

- Five 32-bit variables are initialized with specific constants:
  - h0 = 0x67452301
  - h1 = 0xEFCDAB89
  - h2 = 0x98BADCFE
  - h3 = 0x10325476
  - h4 = 0xC3D2E1F0

### 4. **Processing Message in 512-bit Blocks**

- Each block is divided into 16 words (32 bits each), then expanded into 80 words using bitwise operations.
- For each of 80 rounds per block, a series of logical functions (including AND, OR, XOR, NOT) and modular additions are applied.
- The five state variables are updated in each round.

### 5. **Output**

- After all blocks are processed, the hash value is the concatenation of h0, h1, h2, h3, and h4 (totaling 160 bits).
- Final output is typically shown as a 40-character hexadecimal value.

#### Example in Pseudocode

```plaintext
for each 512-bit block:
    expand block into 80 32-bit words
    initialize variables a, b, c, d, e with h0-h4
    for i = 0 to 79:
        perform round-specific operations and logical functions
    update h0-h4
output: h0 || h1 || h2 || h3 || h4
````

## Pros and Cons of SHA-1

|**Pros**|**Cons**|
|---|---|
|More secure than MD5 (historically)|Vulnerable to collision attacks|
|Widespread historical adoption|No longer considered secure for cryptography|
|Simple and efficient implementation|Susceptible to chosen-prefix collisions|
|Good performance on most platforms|Phased out by major organizations and browsers|

## Why SHA-1 is Broken

SHA-1 was designed to be collision-resistant, but cryptanalysis has shown this is no longer the case. In February 2017, Google and CWI Amsterdam publicly demonstrated the first practical SHA-1 collision, known as the **SHAttered** attack. This achievement proved that attackers can create two different documents with the same SHA-1 hash, undermining trust in digital signatures, certificates, and file integrity mechanisms.

### Key Weaknesses

- **Collision Attacks:** It is now feasible (using cloud computing) for attackers to generate two different inputs with the same SHA-1 hash.
- **Cost of Attack Drops:** As of 2024, the cost to generate a SHA-1 collision is under $50,000, well within the reach of motivated attackers.
- **Chosen-prefix Collisions:** In 2019, researchers demonstrated more dangerous "chosen-prefix" collisions, allowing attackers to create two _arbitrary_ files with matching SHA-1 hashes.
- **Deprecation:** Browsers, certificate authorities, and security standards organizations have deprecated SHA-1 for all security-critical purposes.

**Summary:** SHA-1 should not be used for cryptographic security. SHA-2 and SHA-3 are the current recommended standards.

## Latest News about SHA-1

- **2024:** Almost all major browsers, TLS libraries, and certificate authorities have completely disabled support for SHA-1 certificates.
- **Git and Code Repositories:** Git, which originally relied on SHA-1, has implemented SHA-256 support and recommends migrating repositories.
- **Cryptanalysis:** Researchers continue to improve collision-finding techniques; in 2023, new records for SHA-1 collision computation were set.
- **Industry Guidance:** NIST, Microsoft, Google, and Mozilla have all issued strong warnings or outright bans on the use of SHA-1 in any security context.

**Bottom Line:** SHA-1 is obsolete and insecure for any use beyond non-critical checksums.

## References

- [NIST Secure Hash Standard (SHA-1)](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/180/1/final)
- [SHAttered: First Practical Collision for SHA-1 (Google & CWI)](https://shattered.io/)
- [SHA-1 is a Shambles (chosen-prefix collision attack)](https://sha-mbles.github.io/)
- [RFC 6194: Deprecation of SHA-1 and MD5](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6194)
- [Wikipedia: SHA-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1)
- [NIST Policy on Hash Functions](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-131a/rev-2/final)

> **Note:** For new applications, use SHA-2 (e.g., SHA-256, SHA-512) or SHA-3.
