src/content/blog/SHA2-hash.md, before:

---
title: "Understanding the SHA-2 Algorithm Family"
description: "The SHA-2 family of cryptographic hash functions is the gold standard for digital security today."
difficulty: "beginner"
pubDate: 2025-07-18
author: "Pashalis Laoutaris"
category: "Hash Functions"
visualizer: "SHA2Visualizer"
---

## Understanding the SHA-2 Family: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512

The SHA-2 family of cryptographic hash functions is the gold standard for digital security today. SHA-2 successfully replaced its vulnerable predecessors (MD5 and SHA-1), and remains the default for secure digital signatures, certificates, and data integrity checks worldwide. This article explores the history, inner workings, variants, strengths, and why SHA-2 remains the standard, along with recent developments and references.

---

## Table of Contents

1. [History of SHA-2](#history-of-sha-2)
2. [SHA-2 Variants: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512](#sha-2-variants-sha-224-sha-256-and-sha-512)
3. [How SHA-2 Works: A Detailed Guide](#how-sha-2-works-a-detailed-guide)
4. [Pros and Cons of SHA-2](#pros-and-cons-of-sha-2)
5. [Why SHA-2 is the Current Standard](#why-sha-2-is-the-current-standard)
6. [Latest News about SHA-2](#latest-news-about-sha-2)
7. [References](#references)

---

## History of SHA-2

SHA-2 (Secure Hash Algorithm 2) was designed by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2001 as an advancement over SHA-1. SHA-2 consists of a family of six hash functions: SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512, SHA-512/224, and SHA-512/256.

The most widely used variants are SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512, which offer increasing levels of output length and security. SHA-2's robust design made it resistant to the weaknesses that plagued earlier algorithms. SHA-2 quickly became the new standard for digital signatures, SSL/TLS certificates, and software integrity.

---

## SHA-2 Variants: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512

| **Variant** | **Digest Size** | **Block Size** | **Word Size** | **Rounds** | **Use Cases**                   |
|-------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------|------------|----------------------------------|
| SHA-224     | 224 bits (28 B) | 512 bits      | 32 bits       | 64         | Truncated SHA-256, low-overhead  |
| SHA-256     | 256 bits (32 B) | 512 bits      | 32 bits       | 64         | Digital signatures, SSL, hashing |
| SHA-512     | 512 bits (64 B) | 1024 bits     | 64 bits       | 80         | High-security applications       |

- **SHA-224**: A shorter digest, useful where storage or bandwidth is limited.
- **SHA-256**: The most commonly used, balancing speed and strong security.
- **SHA-512**: Offers higher security and performance on 64-bit architectures.

---

## How SHA-2 Works: A Detailed Guide

All SHA-2 variants process data in blocks, using similar steps but with different parameters and constants.

### 1. **Padding**

- The message is padded so its length (in bits) is congruent to 448 mod 512 (SHA-224/256) or 896 mod 1024 (SHA-512).
- Padding adds a single `1` bit, followed by `0` bits, then the message length as a 64-bit or 128-bit value.

### 2. **Parsing**

- The padded message is split into chunks (blocks) of 512 bits (SHA-224/256) or 1024 bits (SHA-512).

### 3. **Initialization**

- Each variant initializes eight 32-bit or 64-bit state variables with unique constants.

### 4. **Processing**

- Each message block is expanded into a schedule of 64 (SHA-224/256) or 80 (SHA-512) words.
- Each round mixes the state variables using bitwise operations, modular addition, and constants.
- After processing all blocks, the final hash is the concatenation of the state variables.

#### Example (SHA-256) Pseudocode

```plaintext
Initialize eight 32-bit hash values (H0-H7)
for each 512-bit block:
    Prepare message schedule (W[0..63])
    Initialize working variables (a-h) with H0-H7
    for i = 0 to 63:
        Perform round-specific functions and mixing
    Add working variables back into H0-H7
Output H0-H7 concatenated (256 bits)
````

## Pros and Cons of SHA-2

|**Pros**|**Cons**|
|---|---|
|Extremely strong security|Slower than MD5/SHA-1 (but fast enough for most)|
|No practical collisions found|Larger hash outputs require more storage/transmit|
|Widely adopted and trusted|Not quantum-resistant (like all current hashes)|
|Efficient on modern hardware|SHA-512 less efficient on 32-bit processors|
|Flexible (multiple output sizes)|Some legacy systems may not support SHA-2|

---

## Why SHA-2 is the Current Standard

SHA-2 stands as the industry standard because:

- **Cryptographic Strength**: No practical collision or pre-image attacks have been found against SHA-2. It remains secure against all known attacks.
- **Rigorous Vetting**: SHA-2 has undergone extensive academic and industrial scrutiny for over two decades.
- **Widespread Adoption**: Used in TLS/SSL, digital signatures, cryptocurrencies (e.g., Bitcoin), code signing, and more.
- **Support and Interoperability**: Supported in virtually all major operating systems, programming languages, and security protocols.
- **Regulatory Endorsement**: Mandated by NIST, PCI DSS, HIPAA, and many international standards for cryptographic protection.

### Comparison with Alternatives

- **SHA-1 and MD5**: Proven insecure.
- **SHA-3**: Released as a future-proof alternative, but SHA-2 remains faster and more widely implemented.
- **Quantum Threat**: SHA-2 is not quantum-safe, but no practical quantum attacks exist yet; NIST is working on post-quantum standards.

---

## Latest News about SHA-2

- **2024**: SHA-2 remains mandatory for digital signatures, certificates, and code integrity in all modern standards.
- **Cryptanalysis**: No practical breaks; researchers continue to analyze SHA-2, but only minor theoretical weaknesses have been found.
- **SHA-3 Adoption**: Some organizations are starting to experiment with SHA-3 for redundancy, but SHA-2 remains the default.
- **Cryptocurrency**: Bitcoin and many altcoins continue to use SHA-256 at the core of their security.
- **Software Development**: SHA-256 and SHA-512 are the default hash algorithms in most cryptographic libraries (OpenSSL, BoringSSL, Windows, Linux, etc.).

---

## References

- [NIST FIPS 180-4: Secure Hash Standard (SHA-2)](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.180-4.pdf)
- [Wikipedia: SHA-2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2)
- [OWASP Cryptographic Storage Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cryptographic_Storage_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [NIST Computer Security Resource Center - SHA-2](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hash-functions/sha-2)
- [RFC 6234: US Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6234)
- [Bitcoin Whitepaper (SHA-256 usage)](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)

---

> **Note:** For all new cryptographic applications, SHA-2 (especially SHA-256 or SHA-512) is recommended unless a specific regulatory or technical reason requires otherwise.

Commit message:

upd: added images for blog posts, changed abot,cookies link descriptions

src/content/blog/SHA2-hash.md, after:

---
title: "Understanding the SHA-2 Algorithm Family"
description: "The SHA-2 family of cryptographic hash functions is the gold standard for digital security today."
difficulty: "beginner"
pubDate: 2025-07-18
author: "Pashalis Laoutaris"
category: "Hash Functions"
thumbnail: "./images/sha2-hash.jpg"
thumbnailAlt: "A visual representation of the SHA-2 hashing algorithm."
visualizer: "SHA2Visualizer"
---

## Understanding the SHA-2 Family: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512

The SHA-2 family of cryptographic hash functions is the gold standard for digital security today. SHA-2 successfully replaced its vulnerable predecessors (MD5 and SHA-1), and remains the default for secure digital signatures, certificates, and data integrity checks worldwide. This article explores the history, inner workings, variants, strengths, and why SHA-2 remains the standard, along with recent developments and references.

---

## Table of Contents

1. [History of SHA-2](#history-of-sha-2)
2. [SHA-2 Variants: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512](#sha-2-variants-sha-224-sha-256-and-sha-512)
3. [How SHA-2 Works: A Detailed Guide](#how-sha-2-works-a-detailed-guide)
4. [Pros and Cons of SHA-2](#pros-and-cons-of-sha-2)
5. [Why SHA-2 is the Current Standard](#why-sha-2-is-the-current-standard)
6. [Latest News about SHA-2](#latest-news-about-sha-2)
7. [References](#references)

---

## History of SHA-2

SHA-2 (Secure Hash Algorithm 2) was designed by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2001 as an advancement over SHA-1. SHA-2 consists of a family of six hash functions: SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512, SHA-512/224, and SHA-512/256.

The most widely used variants are SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512, which offer increasing levels of output length and security. SHA-2's robust design made it resistant to the weaknesses that plagued earlier algorithms. SHA-2 quickly became the new standard for digital signatures, SSL/TLS certificates, and software integrity.

---

## SHA-2 Variants: SHA-224, SHA-256, and SHA-512

| **Variant** | **Digest Size** | **Block Size** | **Word Size** | **Rounds** | **Use Cases**                   |
|-------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------|------------|----------------------------------|
| SHA-224     | 224 bits (28 B) | 512 bits      | 32 bits       | 64         | Truncated SHA-256, low-overhead  |
| SHA-256     | 256 bits (32 B) | 512 bits      | 32 bits       | 64         | Digital signatures, SSL, hashing |
| SHA-512     | 512 bits (64 B) | 1024 bits     | 64 bits       | 80         | High-security applications       |

- **SHA-224**: A shorter digest, useful where storage or bandwidth is limited.
- **SHA-256**: The most commonly used, balancing speed and strong security.
- **SHA-512**: Offers higher security and performance on 64-bit architectures.

---

## How SHA-2 Works: A Detailed Guide

All SHA-2 variants process data in blocks, using similar steps but with different parameters and constants.

### 1. **Padding**

- The message is padded so its length (in bits) is congruent to 448 mod 512 (SHA-224/256) or 896 mod 1024 (SHA-512).
- Padding adds a single `1` bit, followed by `0` bits, then the message length as a 64-bit or 128-bit value.

### 2. **Parsing**

- The padded message is split into chunks (blocks) of 512 bits (SHA-224/256) or 1024 bits (SHA-512).

### 3. **Initialization**

- Each variant initializes eight 32-bit or 64-bit state variables with unique constants.

### 4. **Processing**

- Each message block is expanded into a schedule of 64 (SHA-224/256) or 80 (SHA-512) words.
- Each round mixes the state variables using bitwise operations, modular addition, and constants.
- After processing all blocks, the final hash is the concatenation of the state variables.

#### Example (SHA-256) Pseudocode

```plaintext
Initialize eight 32-bit hash values (H0-H7)
for each 512-bit block:
    Prepare message schedule (W[0..63])
    Initialize working variables (a-h) with H0-H7
    for i = 0 to 63:
        Perform round-specific functions and mixing
    Add working variables back into H0-H7
Output H0-H7 concatenated (256 bits)
````

## Pros and Cons of SHA-2

|**Pros**|**Cons**|
|---|---|
|Extremely strong security|Slower than MD5/SHA-1 (but fast enough for most)|
|No practical collisions found|Larger hash outputs require more storage/transmit|
|Widely adopted and trusted|Not quantum-resistant (like all current hashes)|
|Efficient on modern hardware|SHA-512 less efficient on 32-bit processors|
|Flexible (multiple output sizes)|Some legacy systems may not support SHA-2|

---

## Why SHA-2 is the Current Standard

SHA-2 stands as the industry standard because:

- **Cryptographic Strength**: No practical collision or pre-image attacks have been found against SHA-2. It remains secure against all known attacks.
- **Rigorous Vetting**: SHA-2 has undergone extensive academic and industrial scrutiny for over two decades.
- **Widespread Adoption**: Used in TLS/SSL, digital signatures, cryptocurrencies (e.g., Bitcoin), code signing, and more.
- **Support and Interoperability**: Supported in virtually all major operating systems, programming languages, and security protocols.
- **Regulatory Endorsement**: Mandated by NIST, PCI DSS, HIPAA, and many international standards for cryptographic protection.

### Comparison with Alternatives

- **SHA-1 and MD5**: Proven insecure.
- **SHA-3**: Released as a future-proof alternative, but SHA-2 remains faster and more widely implemented.
- **Quantum Threat**: SHA-2 is not quantum-safe, but no practical quantum attacks exist yet; NIST is working on post-quantum standards.

---

## Latest News about SHA-2

- **2024**: SHA-2 remains mandatory for digital signatures, certificates, and code integrity in all modern standards.
- **Cryptanalysis**: No practical breaks; researchers continue to analyze SHA-2, but only minor theoretical weaknesses have been found.
- **SHA-3 Adoption**: Some organizations are starting to experiment with SHA-3 for redundancy, but SHA-2 remains the default.
- **Cryptocurrency**: Bitcoin and many altcoins continue to use SHA-256 at the core of their security.
- **Software Development**: SHA-256 and SHA-512 are the default hash algorithms in most cryptographic libraries (OpenSSL, BoringSSL, Windows, Linux, etc.).

---

## References

- [NIST FIPS 180-4: Secure Hash Standard (SHA-2)](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.180-4.pdf)
- [Wikipedia: SHA-2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2)
- [OWASP Cryptographic Storage Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cryptographic_Storage_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [NIST Computer Security Resource Center - SHA-2](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hash-functions/sha-2)
- [RFC 6234: US Secure Hash Algorithms (SHA and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6234)
- [Bitcoin Whitepaper (SHA-256 usage)](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)

---

> **Note:** For all new cryptographic applications, SHA-2 (especially SHA-256 or SHA-512) is recommended unless a specific regulatory or technical reason requires otherwise.
